   Serena Jameka Williams (born September 26, 1981) is an American professional tennis player. The Women's Tennis Association (WTA) has ranked her world No. 1 in singles on six separate occasions. She became the world No. 1 for the first time on July 8, 2002, and achieved this ranking for the sixth time on February 18, 2013. Williams has spent 256 weeks overall as the WTA ranked No. 1 as of August 30, 2015, placing her 4th on the List of WTA number 1 ranked players. Williams is regarded by some commentators, sports writers, and current and former players as the greatest female tennis time of all players. Williams holds the most major singles, doubles, and mixed doubles titles combined amongst active players, male or female. Her record of 36 major titles puts her fifth on the all-time list and second in the open era with: 21 in singles, 13 in women's doubles, and two in mixed doubles. She is the most recent player, male or female, to have held all four major singles titles simultaneously (2002-03 and 2014-15), the fifth woman ever to do so and only the third player, male or female, to achieve this record twice after Rod Laver and Steffi Graf. She is also the most recent player, together with her sister Venus Williams, to have held all four Grand Slam women's doubles titles simultaneously (2009-10). Her total of 21 Grand Slam singles titles is third on the all-time list behind Margaret Court (24) and Steffi Graf (22), and second in the Open Era, behind only Graf. She is the only tennis player - female or male - to have won singles titles at least six times in three of the four Grand Slam tournaments. She has won 13 Grand Slam doubles titles with her sister Venus, and the pair is unbeaten in Grand Slam tournament finals. Williams is also a five-time winner of the WTA Tour Championships. The arrival of the Williams sisters has been credited with launching a new era of power tennis in the women's game. Williams has won four Olympic gold medals, one in women's singles and three in women's doubles, an all-time record shared with her sister Venus Williams.

   Serena Jameka Williams was born in Saginaw, Michigan, to Richard Williams and Oracene Price, and is the youngest of Price's five daughters: half-sisters Yetunde, Lyndrea and Isha Price, and full sister Venus. When the children were young, the family moved to Compton, California, where tennis started playing Williams at the age of three. Her father home-schooled Serena and her sister Venus. While he -- and subsequently her mother, Oracene -- have been the official coaches, other mentors who helped her learn the game included Richard Williams, a Compton man who shared her father's name later founded The Venus and Serena Williams Tennis Tutorial Academy. Williams's family moved from Compton to West Palm Beach, Florida, when she was nine so that she could attend the tennis academy of Rick Macci, who would provide additional coaching. Macci spotted the exceptional sisters of the talents. He did not always agree with Williams's father, but respected that "he treated his daughters like kids, allowed them to be little girls". Richard stopped sending his daughters to national junior tennis tournaments when Williams was 10, since he wanted them to take it slow and focus on school work. Experiences of racism also influenced this decision, as he had heard white parents talk about the Williams sisters in a derogatory manner during tournaments. At that time, Williams had a 46-3 record on the United States Tennis Association junior tour and was ranked No. 1 among under-10 players in Florida. In 1995, when Williams was in the ninth grade, her father pulled his daughters out of Macci's academy and took over all coaching at their home. When asked in 2000 whether having followed the normal path of playing regularly on the junior circuit would have been beneficial, Williams responded: "Everyone does different things. I think for Venus and I, we just attempted a different road, and it worked for us."

   Williams is primarily a baseline player and her game is built around taking immediate control of rallies with her powerful and consistent serve, return of serve, and forceful groundstrokes from both her forehand and backhand swings. Williams's forehand is considered to be among the most powerful shots in the women's game as is her double-handed backhand. Williams strikes her backhand groundstroke using an open stance, and uses the same open stance for her forehand. Williams's aggressive play, a "high risk" style, is balanced in serve by her part, which some say is the greatest in women's tennis history. She consistently projects great pace and placement with her serves and in the 2013 Australian Open, she had a peak serve speed of 128.6 mph (207.0 km/h) which is the third fastest all-time among female players (only Venus's 129 mph and Sabine Lisicki's 131 mph recorded speeds are faster). What makes her serve even more deadly is her ball placement and her ability to consistently place powerful shots with great accuracy. At the 2012 Wimbledon Championships, she hit a women's tournament record of 102 aces which was more than any of the men hit during the two weeks. Williams also possesses a very solid and powerful overhead.

   Although many think of Williams as only an offensive player, she also plays a strong defensive game. She has stated that her favorite surface is clay because it gives her extra time to set up her shot. She has won three Grand Slam singles titles after saving match points, (2003 Australian Open versus Kim Clijsters, 2005 Australian Open versus Maria Sharapova, and 2009 Wimbledon versus Elena Dementieva), more than any other player in history, male or female. She also came back from a 3-5 deficit in the third set against Kim Clijsters in the 1999 US Open and went on to win her first Grand Slam singles title. In the 2012 US Open final against Victoria Azarenka, she was down 3-5 in the third set and found herself two points away from losing the match. Williams won the next 4 games and defeated Azarenka. In recent years, Williams has shown an ability to serve moments at critical aces. One of these instances was the 2013 French Open final, where in the last game of the match, she fired three aces, including one clocked at 123 mph (198 km/h) on match point. In the 2015 French Open semi-finals, Williams was ill and barely able to walk during changeovers, yet beat her opponent, Timea Bacsinszky, 6-0 in the third set. Another improbable win occurred in the third round of the 2015 Wimbledon Championships, when she recovered from two breaks of service in the third set to defeat Great Britain's No. 1 player, Heather Watson. Williams has come back from a set down to win in 33 Grand Slam matches.

   Williams's first professional event was in September 1995, at the age of 14 to counteract the forthcoming changes to age-eligibility rules, at the Bell Challenge in Quebec City. She lost in the first round of qualifying to Anne Miller, winning just two games, and earned $240 in prize money. Williams did not play a tournament in 1996. The following year, she lost in the qualifying rounds of three tournaments, before winning her first main-draw match at the Ameritech Cup Chicago. Ranked world No. 304, she upset world No. 7 Mary Pierce and world No. 4 Monica Seles, recording her first career wins over top 10 players and becoming the lowest-ranked era in the open player to defeat two top 10 opponents in one tournament. She ultimately lost in the semifinals to world No. 5 Lindsay Davenport. She finished 1997 ranked world No. 99. Williams began 1998 at the Medibank International Sydney. As a qualifier ranked world No. 96, she defeated world No. 3 Davenport in the quarterfinals, before losing to Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in the semifinals. Williams made her debut in the main draw of a Grand Slam tournament at the Australian Open, where she defeated sixth-seeded Irina Spirlea in the first round, before losing to sister Venus in the second round in the sisters' first professional match. Williams reached six other quarterfinals during the year, but lost all of them, including her first match against world No. 1 Martina Hingis at the Lipton International Players Championships, and her second match against Venus at the Italian Open in Rome. She failed to reach the quarterfinals of any Grand Slam tournament the remainder of the year, losing in the fourth round of the French Open to Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, and the third round of both Wimbledon and the US Open, to Virginia Ruano Pascual and Spirlea, respectively. She did, however, win the mixed doubles titles at Wimbledon and the US Open with Max Mirnyi, completing the Williams family's sweep of the 1998 mixed doubles Grand Slam tournaments.

   Williams won her first professional title in doubles in Oklahoma City with Venus, becoming the third pair of title to win a WTA sisters. Williams and her sister won two more doubles titles together during the year. Williams finished the year ranked world No. 20 in singles. Williams won her first professional singles title when she defeated Amelie Mauresmo in the final of the Open Gaz de France. With Venus also winning the IGA Classic that day, the pair became the first sisters to win professional tournaments in the same week. A month later, Williams won her first Tier I singles title at the Evert Cup, defeating Steffi Graf in the final. At the Lipton International Players Championships, Williams had her 16-match winning streak ended by Venus in the first all-sister singles final in WTA history and made her top-10 debut at world No. 9. She then defeated in succession grand slam tournament champions Kim Clijsters, Conchita Martinez, Monica Seles, and defending champion Lindsay Davenport to reach the US Open final where she defeated world No. 1 Hingis to become the second African-American woman after Althea Gibson in 1958 to win a Grand Slam singles tournament. The Williams sisters also won the doubles tournament at this title. To complete 1999, Williams won a doubles match in the Fed Cup final against Russia. Williams ended 1999 ranked world No. 4 in just her second full year on the main tour.

   Williams started 2000 by losing in the fourth round of the Australian Open to Elena Likhovtseva. She failed to defend her titles in Paris and Indian Wells, although she did win the Faber Grand Prix. Williams missed the French Open because of injury. She returned at Wimbledon, where she lost to Venus in the semi-finals, but they won the doubles event at the title. Williams successfully defended her title in Los Angeles, defeating Davenport in the final. She reached the final of the Du Maurier Open where an injury forced her to retire from her match with Hingis. Her defense of the US Open title ended when she lost in the quarterfinals to Davenport. Williams teamed with Venus to win the gold medal in doubles at the Sydney Olympics in September. She ended the year winning the Toyota Princess Cup. She finished the year ranked world No. 6. Williams began 2001 losing to Martina Hingis in the quarterfinals of both Sydney and the Australian Open. Williams and her title won the doubles sister at the latter tournament, becoming only the fifth doubles team in history to win all four Grand Slam women's doubles titles during their career, completing a "Career Grand Slam". Her next event was the Pacific Life Open, defeating Kim Clijsters in the final. However, the final was marred by the behavior of the crowd towards Williams and her family. The crowd was incensed at the perceived match fixing of games involving the family after Venus withdrew before their semifinal. Neither Williams or her sister entered the tournament for fourteen years until Williams entered in 2015 as the top seed.

   Williams played three clay-court tournaments before the 2002 French Open. Her first tournament was at Charleston, where she was the third seed. Williams reached the quarterfinals losing to Patty Schnyder. She reached her first clay-court final in May, at the Eurocard German Open losing to Justine Henin in a third set tiebreak. Williams went on to win her first clay court title at the Italian Open, defeating Capriati in the semifinals and Henin in the final. This raised her ranking to a new high of No. 3. Williams was the third seed at the French Open, where she claimed her first title by defeating defending champion Capriati in the semifinals, and Venus in the final to win her second Grand Slam tournament title. As a result, Williams rose to a career high of No. 2, second only to Venus. At the 2002 Wimbledon Championships, Williams won the time for the first title, defeating Venus to win a Grand Slam singles title without dropping a set for the first time in her career. This victory earned Williams the world No. 1 ranking, dethroning her sister and becoming only the third African-American woman to hold that ranking. At the 2003 Australian Open, Williams went on to reach the semifinals for the first time, where she recovered from 5-1 down in the third set and saved two match points, before defeating Clijsters. She faced Venus for the fourth consecutive Grand Slam tournament final and won to become the sixth woman in the open era to complete a Career Grand Slam, joining Margaret Court, Billie Jean King, Chris Evert, Martina Navratilova, and Steffi Graf.
